Feature/biohackrxiv papers (#27)
neicnordic/sda-dashboard: biohackrxiv-paper-2022/paper-20/paper.md

The goal of this project was to develop an onboarding suite consisting of simple scripts, supplemented by documentation, that would help newcomers to the EGA federation in order understand in depth the main concepts, while enabling them to get involved in the development of the technology as quickly as possible.

At the same time we aimed to identify existing technologies and standards
across FEGA nodes that can be used as a reference to upcoming nodes.

This biohackathon project is a result of a nordic collaboration under the umbrella of the Nordic e-Infrastructure Collaboration (NeIC)[@NEIC] where we've had three projects over the last 7 years, [Tryggve1](https://neic.no/tryggve1/)[@Tryggve1], [Tryggve2](https://neic.no/tryggve2/)[@Tryggve2] and Heilsa[@Heilsa]. For this reason the source code and scripts are shared in the same repository as the `Operator dashboard for controlling the NeIC Sensitive Data Archive` (Project 21) from BioHackathon-Europe 2022.

# Results

> In order to achieve the project goals, our plan to focus on the main pipeline, handling the archiving of the data submitted by users to Federated EGA. Specifically, the goal is to create a number of scripts that would lead the user/developer through the process followed from submitting a file to archiving it and making it available for downloading. The scripts will shed light on the processes under the hood, including the messaging between the services, the records stored in the database as well as the tools used for encrypting and decrypting the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to achieve the project goals, our plan is to focus on the main pipeline, handling the archiving of the data submitted by users to Federated EGA. Specifically, the goal is to create a number of scripts that would lead the user/developer through the process followed from submitting a file to archiving it and making it available for downloading. The scripts will shed light on the processes under the hood, including the messaging between the services, the records stored in the database as well as the tools used for encrypting and decrypting the data.
```

The following tasks were accomplished as part of the BioHackathon:

\begin{enumerate}
\item Identify the roles that could be part of operation of an Federated EGA node, at the same time specify the needs for each role;
\item Identify the technical requirements joining the federation;
\item Develop a software stack containing the main services for testing purposes and document connections between the services;
\end{enumerate}

## Roles Involved in a Federated EGA Node

In order to focus our work during the biohackathon we decided to first identify the roles involved in running a Federated EGA node:

> - **Node Representative** - aims to understand what services need to be adjust for their node so that they can run the federated EGA in their infrastructure;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Node Representative** - aims to understand what services need to be adjusted for their node so that they can run the federated EGA in their infrastructure;
```

> - **Developer** - needs documentation about the starting points of the code base in order to start reading as well as a demo stack of the services;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Developer** - needs documentation about the starting points of the code base, in order to start reading, as well as a demo stack of the services;
```

> - **Operator** - requires a technical checklist to see if my node is technically ready to join federated EGA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Operator** - requires a technical checklist to see if the node is technically ready to join federated EGA
```

> - **Helpdesk** - want to see the files a submitter has submitted so that I can assist in the submission process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Helpdesk** - wants to see the files a submitter has submitted, in order to be able to assist in the submission process
```

- **Submitter** - would need to submit data to a Federated EGA node.

> Our attention was towards *Developers* and *Submitters* with the starter pack, while the documentation was we produced aimed to help *Node Representative* and *Operator* roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our attention was towards *Developers* and *Submitters* with the starter pack, while the documentation we produced aimed to help *Node Representative* and *Operator* roles.
```

| 11 | Main Programming Language 	| Main programming language for the technical stack pipeline                                                                                                                                                                                                	| -    	|        	|
| 12 | Deployment Method         	| Means which technology is used to put in production different components                                                                                                                                                                                  	| -    	|        	|
| 13 | Helpdesk Management System	| Main tool for user/helpdesk communication                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	| N    	|        	|

> | 14 | Helpdesk Portal Technology	| Federated EGA node helpe desk will provide  means of interacting with submitter, registering DPA, establishing DACs  and monitoring submissions.                                                                                                             	| N    	| 15     	|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 14 | Helpdesk Portal Technology	| Federated EGA node help desk will provide  means of interacting with submitter, registering DPA, establishing DACs  and monitoring submissions.                                                                                                             	| N    	| 15     	|
```

| 15 | Monitoring Tool           	| Means of providing an overview of the status of submissions. Good also for auditing purposes.                                                                                                                                                             	| N    	| 14     	|
| 16 | Metadata Submission Method	| Means how the researchers will send the metadata to Central EGA through a cEGA submitter portal, node portal or another solution                                                                                                                          	| Y    	|        	|
| 17 | Download Solution         	| Means for a Requester to access the data once approval has been granted.                                                                                                                                                                                  	| Y    	| 7, 8, 18   |

> | 18 | Data Access Tool          	| Means of enabling Requesters to Download the archived data. tool for facilitating DACs                                                                                                                                                                    	| N    	|        	|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 18 | Data Access Tool          	| Means of enabling Requesters to Download the archived data. Tool for facilitating DACs                                                                                                                                                                    	| N    	|        	|
```

| 19 | General Contact           	| Email or website to contact the team deploying the solution                                                                                                                                                                                               	| Y    	|        	|

Table: Federated EGA Technical Requirements

This information is augumented with technologies utilized by current nodes (as of November 2022): in a fork of the [FEGA-Onboarding documentation](https://ahornos.github.io/FEGA-onboarding/topics/technical-operational/#technical-requirements).

### Encryption

> All sensitive data uploaded to a FEGA node need to be encrypted using the crypt4gh standard[@crypt4gh]. For encrypting, apart from the file itself, all one needs is:

Reviewer: Is crypt4gh supposed to be a link?

Reviewer 2: no, there is a paper that is related to crypt4gh we should use that

> 1. The public key used for the encryption which is provided by the FEGA node
> One of the available crypt4gh implementations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The public key used for the encryption which is provided by the FEGA node.

One of the available crypt4gh implementations:
```

    - [crypt4gh python](https://github.com/EGA-archive/crypt4gh) module or [crypt4gh-gui python](https://github.com/CSCfi/crypt4gh-gui) module wrapper with GUI
    - [crypth4gh go](https://github.com/neicnordic/crypt4gh) implementation or [sdi-cli](https://github.com/NBISweden/sda-cli) go wrapper
    - [crypt4gh-rust](https://github.com/EGA-archive/crypt4gh-rust) Rust implementation
    - [crypt4gh](https://github.com/uio-bmi/crypt4gh) Java implementation
    - [htslib-crypt4gh](https://github.com/samtools/htslib-crypt4gh) C implementation
    - [crypt4gh](https://github.com/silverdaz/crypt4gh) C implementation 
2. Optionally a private key created locally by the user 

## Federated EGA Starter Stack

> The FEGA Started Stack from https://github.com/neicnordic/sda-dashboard was developed agains the services developed in the Heilsa project, however

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FEGA Started Stack from https://github.com/neicnordic/sda-dashboard was developed against the services developed in the Heilsa project, however
```

another similar stack was identified at: https://github.com/EGA-archive/LocalEGA .

> During the Elixir Biohackathon 2022 the starter stack was developed further, bugs fixed and tested by members by of two nodes (Greece and France) that were new to the Federated EGA workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the Elixir Biohackathon 2022 the starter stack was developed further, bugs fixed and tested by members of two nodes (Greece and France) that were new to the Federated EGA workflow.
```

\end{enumerate}

## Roles Involved in a Federated EGA Node

In order to focus our work during the biohackathon we decided to first identify the roles involved in running a Federated EGA node:

* **Node Representative** - aims to understand what services need to be adjusted for their node so that they can run the federated EGA in their infrastructure;
* **Developer** - needs documentation about the starting points of the code base, in order to start reading, as well as a demo stack of the services;
* **Operator** - requires a technical checklist to see if the node is technically ready to join federated EGA
* **Helpdesk** - wants to see the files a submitter has submitted, in order to be able to assist in the submission process
* **Submitter** - would need to submit data to a Federated EGA node.

Our attention was towards *Developers* and *Submitters* with the starter pack, while the documentation we produced aimed to help *Node Representative* and *Operator* roles.

Given that the *Submitter* role covers a broader spectrum of questions that such a role might have we decided to focus on the encryption of files, which is a requirement for a file to be correctly submitted.

> We underestood that an easy tool that can assist me to encrypt the files (using Crypt4GH [@crypt4gh]) so we aimed to identify and document how such a tool could be utilized.

Reviewer 3: The sentence above doesnt make sense to me ;-)

Reviewer 2: rephrased

|:--:|:-----------------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:----------:|
| 1  | URL                           | Official website for documentation                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |            |
| 2  | Credentials                   | For connecting to Central EGA there are 2 types of credentials required:  User API for identifying and validating in Submitter Inbox the cEGA accounts cEGA MQ credentials for connecting FEGA Node MQ                                                        |            |

> | 3  | FEGA Node Encryption key pair | A Crypt4GH key pair generated by the FEGA  Node, and the public is shared with the Submitter so that files are sent  encrypted for the FEGA Node                                                                                                              |            |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| 3  | FEGA Node Encryption key pair | A Crypt4GH key pair generated by the FEGA  Node, the public is shared with the Submitter so that files are sent  encrypted for the FEGA Node                                                                                                              |            |
```

| 17 | Download Solution             | Means for a Requester to access the data once approval has been granted.                                                                                                                                                                                      | 7, 8, 18   |
| 18 | Data Access Tool              | Means of enabling Requesters to Download the archived data. tool for facilitating DACs                                                                                                                                                                        |            |
| 19 | General Contact               | Email or website to contact the team deploying the solution                                                                                                                                                                                                   |            |

Table: Federated EGA Technical Requirements

> From the table above the require points are: 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,16,17,19.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the table above the required points are: 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,16,17,19.
```

      { "type": "md5",
      "value": 
      "1a79a4d60de6718e8e5b326e338ae533"},
      { "type": "sha256", 
      "value": 
      "50d858e0985ecc7f60418aaf0cc5ab587f42c2570a884095a9e8ccacd0f6545c"}
   ]
}
```

- Accession ID Message

Each file will receive an accession ID from Central EGA and this is done via a message sent from Central EGA to a Federated EGA node.

Processed by the the sda-pipeline `finalize` service.
```
{
    "type": "accession",
    "user": "john.smith@smth.org",
    "filepath": "somedir/encrypted.file.c4gh",
    "accession_id": "EGAF00000123456",
    "decrypted_checksums": [ 
        { "type": "sha256", 
        "value": 
        "50d858e0985ecc7f60418aaf0cc5ab587f42c2570a884095a9e8ccacd0f6545c" },
        { "type": "md5",
        "value": "1a79a4d60de6718e8e5b326e338ae533" }
    ]
}
```

# Conclusions and Future work

Part of the members that joined our project represented two nodes that were considering joining the federation, and with their help we were able to identify the missing gaps in the technical requirements, documentation and starter stack, and ultimately were able to guide them through the process of submitting files using the starter stack.

> By taking into account different roles we were able to identify existing gaps in our how we documented the services developed within the Heilsa project and it was also quite useful for the development team working with the code-base and deployments as they could more easily get feedback from new nodes, that had little knowledge on how the messages and operations of FEGA can be organized.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By taking into account different roles we were able to identify existing gaps in the way we documented the services developed within the Heilsa project and this was also quite useful for the development team working with the code-base and deployments as they could more easily get feedback from new nodes, that had little knowledge on how the messages and operations of FEGA can be organized.
```

> The outputs of the Technical requirements have been presented to the Federated EGA Operations Committee and the aim is to reflect the in future versions of the [FEGA-Onboarding](https://ega-archive.github.io/FEGA-onboarding/) documentation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The outputs of the Technical requirements have been presented to the Federated EGA Operations Committee and the aim is to have them reflected in future versions of the [FEGA-Onboarding](https://ega-archive.github.io/FEGA-onboarding/) documentation.
```

> One of the clear directions is that, given the number services required to run a FEGA node, we aim to simplify our setup and streamline our code base.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One of the clear directions is that, given the number of services required to run a FEGA node, we aim to simplify our setup and streamline our code base.
```
